README.md, before:


# MGREML (Multivariate GREML) `VERSION 0.01`

`mgreml` is a command-line tool for rapid estimation of SNP-based heritability and genetic correlations for (nearly) balanced data on many traits in a single analysis using a genomic-relatedness matrix (GRM). `mgreml` can easily handle estimation of the full genetic correlation matrix for up to 100 traits observed in 20,000 individuals. `mgreml` allows users to specify structural models and test hypotheses regarding nested models (e.g. no genetic correlations). In addition, the tool can handle a considerable amount of fixed-effect covariates and a very minor degree of phenotypic missingness. Finally, `mgreml` has options to return e.g. the full set of factor coefficients and their sampling covariance matrix.

## Installation

In order to download `mgreml`, please clone this repository using the following commands
```  
git clone https://github.com/devlaming/mgreml.git
cd mgreml
```

In order to install the Python dependencies, you will need the [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/) Python distribution and package manager. After installing Anaconda, run the following commands to create an environment with `mgreml`'s dependencies:

```
conda env create --file mgreml.yml
conda activate mgreml
```

Once the above has completed, you can run:

```
python ./mgreml -h
```
to print a list of all command-line options. If these commands fail something has gone wrong during the installation process.

## Tutorial

In this short tutorial we will go over the basic functions of `mgreml`. First go over the steps in Installation.

Now, having cloned the `mgreml` repository, the main directory should contain a subdirectory called `tutorial`. This directory in turn contains several files, including `pheno.txt` and `covar.txt`. Details on how this dataset has been generated using simulation can be found in the python script in `./tutorial/simulate.py`

Let's first inspect the `pheno.txt` file. This file contains data in tab-separated format on ten phenotypes observed in a set of 5,000 individuals. The first few columns and rows of this file look as follows:

|FID | IID | Some pheno 101 | Some pheno 102 | Some pheno 103 | ... |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| FID 1 | IID 5001 | -2.0716069263263246 | -3.6759090311303346 | -2.745781585038478 | ... |
| FID 2 | IID 5002 | -1.4715012582461549 | -1.4667468932126324 | -1.4061486757142365 | ... | 
| FID 3 | IID 5003 | -3.3915982459245417 | -7.2773361819872 | -0.5107286051290811 | ... |
| FID 4 | IID 5004 | 3.236244118718508 | 1.3410024876651214 | 2.642661382564801 | ... |
| ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... |

For the same set of individuals, you have a binary genomic-relatedness matrix (a.k.a. GRM) e.g. computed using [PLINK](https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/) or [GCTA](https://cnsgenomics.com/software/gcta/). In this case, the set of binary GRM files comprises `data.grm.bin`, `data.grm.N.bin`, and `data.grm.id`. We refer to this set of binary GRM files by its prefix, i.e. `data`.

The simplest command for running an `mgreml` analysis on this data is as follows:

```
python ./mgreml --grm ./tutorial/data --pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt --out ./tutorial/nocovs
```

Upon carrying out this command, `mgreml` will first report the follow command will be carried out:

```
Call:
mgreml \
--grm ./tutorial/data \
--pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt \
--out ./tutorial/nocovs
```

After a few hundred BFGS iterations, `mgreml` will have finished, and have written e.g. heritability estimates to `./tutorial/nocovs.HSq.out` and genetic correlation estimates to `./tutorial/nocovs.RhoG.out`.

The estimated heritabilities are as follows:

| trait | heritability | standard error |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Some pheno 101 | 0.052012142 | 0.029377156 |
| Some pheno 102 | 0.001615452 | 0.031020903 |
| Some pheno 103 | 0.015868615 | 0.029401385 |
| Some pheno 104 | 0.013322251 | 0.029342585 | 
| Some pheno 105 | 0.037358512 | 0.029760677 |
| Some pheno 106 | 0.171444942 | 0.028955814 |
| Some pheno 107 | 0.004249289 | 0.029571263 |
| Some pheno 108 | 0.001346727 | 0.029682721 |
| Some pheno 109 | 0.016323737 | 0.031897206 |
| Some pheno 110 | 0.156523063 | 0.029363308 | 

Comparing these estimates to the true values in `./tutorial/true.HSq.txt`, printed below, we see that our estimates seem to be biased downwards.

| trait | heritability |
| --- | --- |
| Some pheno 101 | 0.47230192893158857 |
| Some pheno 102 | 0.0070794955805743845 |
| Some pheno 103 | 0.034581822843263034 |
| Some pheno 104 | 0.055009566001384846 |
| Some pheno 105 | 0.4667172940834852 |
| Some pheno 106 | 0.4999339124049756 |
| Some pheno 107 | 0.02222839567470805 |
| Some pheno 108 | 0.03412011302653774 |
| Some pheno 109 | 0.16608084405020662 |
| Some pheno 110 | 0.7421233484196411 |

The reason for this bias, is that we did not control for our fixed-effect covariates, in `./tutorial/covar.txt`, which affect the traits of interest. So we need to use the `--covar` option to specify our fixed-effect covariates. This boils down to the following `mgreml` command:

```
python ./mgreml --grm ./tutorial/data --pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt \
                --covar ./tutorial/covar.txt --out ./tutorial/covs
```

In addition to reporting the heritabilities and their standard errors, `mgreml` also automatically reports genetic and environment correlations, as well as their standard errors.

In case you do not care about standard errors, you can use the `--no-se` option. Especially for a large number of traits, computing the standard errors is computationally demanding, as this requires calculating the average information matrix, which has a computational complexity of the order *NT* <sup>4</sup>, where *T* denotes the number of traits and *N* the number of observations.

`mgreml` also automatically report the fixed-effect estimates (a.k.a. GLS estimates), including the sampling covariance matrix of those estimates, and their standard errors.

Now, suppose each trait has a different set of covariates, `mgreml` can easily handle this using the `--covar-model` option. This option should be followed by a filename which contains a binary table, indicating which covariate affects which phenotype. E.g. the `tutorial` folder contains `covar_model.txt`, of which the content is shown below:

|  | intercept | my covar 301 | my covar 302 | my covar 303 | my covar 304 | my covar 305 | my covar 306 | my covar 307 | my covar 308 | my covar 309 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Some pheno 101 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 102 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 103 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 104 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 105 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 106 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 107 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 108 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 109 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 |
| Some pheno 110 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |

Clearly, this file implies that the intercept is a covariate that applies to all phenotypes, whereas all other covariates all affect different traits. We can now perform `mgreml` estimation under this model for the fixed effects using the following command:

```
python ./mgreml --grm ./tutorial/data --pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt \
                --covar ./tutorial/covar.txt  --covar-model ./tutorial/covar_model.txt \
                --out ./tutorial/covs
```



## Updating `mgreml`

You can update to the newest version of `mgreml` using `git`. First, navigate to your `mgreml` directory (e.g. `cd mgreml`), then run
```
git pull
```
If `mgreml` is up to date, you will see 
```
Already up to date.
```
otherwise, you will see `git` output similar to 
```
remote: Enumerating objects: 5, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (1/1), done.
remote: Total 3 (delta 2), reused 3 (delta 2), pack-reused 0
Unpacking objects: 100% (3/3), 304 bytes | 13.00 KiB/s, done.
From https://github.com/devlaming/mgreml
   5b4ca9a..b18a8cc  master     -> origin/master
Updating 5b4ca9a..b18a8cc
Fast-forward
 README.md | 6 +++---
 1 file changed, 3 insertions(+), 3 deletions(-)
 ```
which tells you which files were changed.

If you have modified the `mgreml` source code yourself, `git pull` may fail with an error such as `Your local changes to the following files would be overwritten by merge`. 

In case the Python dependencies have changed, you can update the `mgreml` environment with

```
conda env update --file mgreml.yml
```

## Support

Before contacting us, please try the following:

1. Go over the tutorial in this `README.md`; this tutorial is quite self-contained
2. The method is described in detail in the supplementary information of the paper (citation below)

If that doesn't work, you can get in touch with us via the [google group](...).

## Citation

If you use the software, please cite

[]()

## License

This project is licensed under GNU GPL v3.

## Authors

Ronald de Vlaming (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)

Eric Slob (University of Cambridge)

Commit message:

introduced structural models in tutorial

README.md, after:


# MGREML (Multivariate GREML) `VERSION 0.01`

`mgreml` is a command-line tool for rapid estimation of SNP-based heritability and genetic correlations for (nearly) balanced data on many traits in a single analysis using a genomic-relatedness matrix (GRM). `mgreml` can easily handle estimation of the full genetic correlation matrix for up to 100 traits observed in 20,000 individuals. `mgreml` allows users to specify structural models and test hypotheses regarding nested models (e.g. no genetic correlations). In addition, the tool can handle a considerable amount of fixed-effect covariates and a very minor degree of phenotypic missingness. Finally, `mgreml` has options to return e.g. the full set of factor coefficients and their sampling covariance matrix.

## Installation

In order to download `mgreml`, please clone this repository using the following commands
```  
git clone https://github.com/devlaming/mgreml.git
cd mgreml
```

In order to install the Python dependencies, you will need the [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/) Python distribution and package manager. After installing Anaconda, run the following commands to create an environment with `mgreml`'s dependencies:

```
conda env create --file mgreml.yml
conda activate mgreml
```

Once the above has completed, you can run:

```
python ./mgreml -h
```
to print a list of all command-line options. If these commands fail something has gone wrong during the installation process.

## Tutorial

In this short tutorial we will go over the basic functions of `mgreml`. First go over the steps in Installation.

Now, having cloned the `mgreml` repository, the main directory should contain a subdirectory called `tutorial`. This directory in turn contains several files, including `pheno.txt` and `covar.txt`. Details on how this dataset has been generated using simulation can be found in the python script in `./tutorial/simulate.py`

Let's first inspect the `pheno.txt` file. This file contains data in tab-separated format on ten phenotypes observed in a set of 5,000 individuals. The first few columns and rows of this file look as follows:

|FID | IID | Some pheno 101 | Some pheno 102 | Some pheno 103 | ... |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| FID 1 | IID 5001 | -2.0716069263263246 | -3.6759090311303346 | -2.745781585038478 | ... |
| FID 2 | IID 5002 | -1.4715012582461549 | -1.4667468932126324 | -1.4061486757142365 | ... | 
| FID 3 | IID 5003 | -3.3915982459245417 | -7.2773361819872 | -0.5107286051290811 | ... |
| FID 4 | IID 5004 | 3.236244118718508 | 1.3410024876651214 | 2.642661382564801 | ... |
| ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... |

For the same set of individuals, you have a binary genomic-relatedness matrix (a.k.a. GRM) e.g. computed using [PLINK](https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/) or [GCTA](https://cnsgenomics.com/software/gcta/). In this case, the set of binary GRM files comprises `data.grm.bin`, `data.grm.N.bin`, and `data.grm.id`. We refer to this set of binary GRM files by its prefix, i.e. `data`.

The simplest command for running an `mgreml` analysis on this data is as follows:

```
python ./mgreml --grm ./tutorial/data --pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt --out ./tutorial/nocovs
```

Upon carrying out this command, `mgreml` will first report the follow command will be carried out:

```
Call:
mgreml \
--grm ./tutorial/data \
--pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt \
--out ./tutorial/nocovs
```

After a few hundred BFGS iterations, `mgreml` will have finished, and have written e.g. heritability estimates to `./tutorial/nocovs.HSq.out` and genetic correlation estimates to `./tutorial/nocovs.RhoG.out`.

The estimated heritabilities are as follows:

| trait | heritability | standard error |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Some pheno 101 | 0.052012142 | 0.029377156 |
| Some pheno 102 | 0.001615452 | 0.031020903 |
| Some pheno 103 | 0.015868615 | 0.029401385 |
| Some pheno 104 | 0.013322251 | 0.029342585 | 
| Some pheno 105 | 0.037358512 | 0.029760677 |
| Some pheno 106 | 0.171444942 | 0.028955814 |
| Some pheno 107 | 0.004249289 | 0.029571263 |
| Some pheno 108 | 0.001346727 | 0.029682721 |
| Some pheno 109 | 0.016323737 | 0.031897206 |
| Some pheno 110 | 0.156523063 | 0.029363308 | 

Comparing these estimates to the true values in `./tutorial/true.HSq.txt`, printed below, we see that our estimates seem to be biased downwards.

| trait | heritability |
| --- | --- |
| Some pheno 101 | 0.47230192893158857 |
| Some pheno 102 | 0.0070794955805743845 |
| Some pheno 103 | 0.034581822843263034 |
| Some pheno 104 | 0.055009566001384846 |
| Some pheno 105 | 0.4667172940834852 |
| Some pheno 106 | 0.4999339124049756 |
| Some pheno 107 | 0.02222839567470805 |
| Some pheno 108 | 0.03412011302653774 |
| Some pheno 109 | 0.16608084405020662 |
| Some pheno 110 | 0.7421233484196411 |

The reason for this bias, is that we did not control for our fixed-effect covariates, in `./tutorial/covar.txt`, which affect the traits of interest. So we need to use the `--covar` option to specify our fixed-effect covariates. This boils down to the following `mgreml` command:

```
python ./mgreml --grm ./tutorial/data --pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt \
                --covar ./tutorial/covar.txt --out ./tutorial/covs
```

In addition to reporting the heritabilities and their standard errors, `mgreml` also automatically reports genetic and environment correlations, as well as their standard errors.

In case you do not care about standard errors, you can use the `--no-se` option. Especially for a large number of traits, computing the standard errors is computationally demanding, as this requires calculating the average information matrix, which has a computational complexity of the order *NT* <sup>4</sup>, where *T* denotes the number of traits and *N* the number of observations.

`mgreml` also automatically report the fixed-effect estimates (a.k.a. GLS estimates), including the sampling covariance matrix of those estimates, and their standard errors.

Now, suppose each trait has a different set of covariates, `mgreml` can easily handle this using the `--covar-model` option. This option should be followed by a filename which contains a binary table, indicating which covariate affects which phenotype. E.g. the `tutorial` folder contains `covar_model.txt`, of which the content is shown below:

|  | intercept | my covar 301 | my covar 302 | my covar 303 | my covar 304 | my covar 305 | my covar 306 | my covar 307 | my covar 308 | my covar 309 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Some pheno 101 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 102 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 103 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 104 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 105 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 106 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 107 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 108 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| Some pheno 109 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 |
| Some pheno 110 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |

Clearly, this file implies that the intercept is a covariate that applies to all phenotypes, whereas all other covariates all affect different traits. We can now perform `mgreml` estimation under this model for the fixed effects using the following command:

```
python ./mgreml --grm ./tutorial/data --pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt \
                --covar ./tutorial/covar.txt  --covar-model ./tutorial/covar_model.txt \
                --out ./tutorial/different_covs
```

Similarly, users can also specify which genetic factor affects which trait and which environment factor affects which trait. Such specifications can be passed to `mgreml` using the `--genetic-model` and `--environment-model` options. Note, that any such user-specified structural model must be identified. Moreover, for the factor specification of the environment, `mgreml` requires as many factors as there are traits.

For example, we could impose a factor structure, where there is only one genetic factor, and where there are *T=10* environment factors, each affecting a different trait. Effectively, this boils down to a model with genetic correlations all equal to one and environment correlations all equal to zero. These factor structures are shown in the files `gen_model.txt` and `env_model.txt` both found in the `tutorial` folder. Both files contain a binary table, with elements equal to one, where a given factor is permitted to affect the given phenotype, and equal to zero otherwise.

To estimate this structural model, we can simply carry out the following command:


```
python ./mgreml --grm ./tutorial/data --pheno ./tutorial/pheno.txt \
                --covar ./tutorial/covar.txt \
                --genetic-model ./tutorial/gen_model.txt \
                --environment-model ./tutorial/env_model.txt \
                --out ./tutorial/custom_model
```





## Updating `mgreml`

You can update to the newest version of `mgreml` using `git`. First, navigate to your `mgreml` directory (e.g. `cd mgreml`), then run
```
git pull
```
If `mgreml` is up to date, you will see 
```
Already up to date.
```
otherwise, you will see `git` output similar to 
```
remote: Enumerating objects: 5, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (1/1), done.
remote: Total 3 (delta 2), reused 3 (delta 2), pack-reused 0
Unpacking objects: 100% (3/3), 304 bytes | 13.00 KiB/s, done.
From https://github.com/devlaming/mgreml
   5b4ca9a..b18a8cc  master     -> origin/master
Updating 5b4ca9a..b18a8cc
Fast-forward
 README.md | 6 +++---
 1 file changed, 3 insertions(+), 3 deletions(-)
 ```
which tells you which files were changed.

If you have modified the `mgreml` source code yourself, `git pull` may fail with an error such as `Your local changes to the following files would be overwritten by merge`. 

In case the Python dependencies have changed, you can update the `mgreml` environment with

```
conda env update --file mgreml.yml
```

## Support

Before contacting us, please try the following:

1. Go over the tutorial in this `README.md`; this tutorial is quite self-contained
2. The method is described in detail in the supplementary information of the paper (citation below)

If that doesn't work, you can get in touch with us via the [google group](...).

## Citation

If you use the software, please cite

[]()

## License

This project is licensed under GNU GPL v3.

## Authors

Ronald de Vlaming (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)

Eric Slob (University of Cambridge)
